Add initial draft of Emeritus Adviser handbook (#790)
kubernetes/sig-release: release-team/role-handbooks/emeritus-adviser/README.md

# Emeritus Adviser Handbook

## Overview

The Emeritus Adviser (EA) is an experienced Release Team (RT) member who returns to the team in an advisory role.

## Responsibilities

The primary duty of the EA is
managing personnel for the release team, including Role Leads and especially Shadows.  The EA monitors the Shadow program and making sure that it is working as an effective apprenticeship process.

As a returning RT member, the EA is also there to supply the Release Lead with historical information about how things were handled in prior releases, and serve as a sounding board when both the Release Lead and Lead Shadows are facing a dilemma.

## Requirements

> The EA is a returning senior Release Team member, ideally a former Release Lead.  If not a former Lead, the EA should either have served in more than one Role on the Release Team, or be a lead in SIG-Release, or both.  They must be tempermentally suited to people management, including a commitment to diversity and helping others ascend the Contributor Ladder.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The EA is a returning senior Release Team member, ideally a former Release Team Lead.  If not a former Release Team Lead, the EA should have been on the Release Team for no less than two release cycles, serving as a Role Lead for at least one of those cycles. 

An ideal Emeritus Adviser is inherently suited to people management, has shown sustained interest in the health and growth of SIG Release, and has a commitment to Release Team diversity and helping others ascend the [Contributor Ladder](https://git.k8s.io/community/community-membership.md).
```

Time commitments for the EA are relatively light, with the largest time commitment in the two-week period where Shadows are being selected.  However, the EA role starts 2-3 weeks before the release cycle officially begins, and continues for 1-2 weeks after it ends.

Due to timing (see below) EAs are not chosen as part of the regular RT selection process.  Instead, interested candidates should contact the outgoing EA and the incoming Release Lead 2 weeks before the final prior release.  Most of the time, the outgoing EA will solicit suitable candidates.

Due to the nature of the role, the EA has no shadows.  The job may, however, be split between more than one person.

## Tasks

### Release Team Selection

Weeks: -2 to 0

> At least 2 weeks before the new release cycle begins, the EA is responsible for posting the "Assemble the X.Y Release Team" issue in the SIG-Release repo.  They should then make sure that the new Release Lead is officially nominated and chosen, and then issue a call for nominations/volunteers for the other Role Leads.

Reviewer 2: This would be the outgoing EA doing this vs the incoming EA correct?

Author: No, it's the incoming EA.

Author: I did it this time around because we didn't have a process yet. But the EA for X.Y should own the whole process from week -2 to week 14.

> At least 2 weeks before the new release cycle begins, the EA is responsible for posting the "Assemble the X.Y Release Team" issue in the SIG-Release repo.  They should then make sure that the new Release Lead is officially nominated and chosen, and then issue a call for nominations/volunteers for the other Role Leads.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
At least 2 weeks before the new release cycle begins, the EA is responsible for posting the "Assemble the X.Y Release Team" issue in the SIG-Release repo ([example](https://github.com/kubernetes/sig-release/issues/776)).  They should then make sure that the new Release Lead is officially nominated and chosen, and then issue a call for nominations/volunteers for the other Role Leads.
```

### Shadow Selection

Weeks: -1 to 1

Once most of the Role Leads are selected, the EA should solicit candidates for Shadows.  Steps for this are:

> 1. Get a copy of the Shadow Form (a Googledoc, currently) from the outgoing EA.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Get a copy of the Shadow Application (on Google Forms, currently) from the outgoing EA.
```

2. Make any changes to it identified as required in the Retro or elsewhere.

> 3. When the new RL gives the OK, open the form and announce it in the following places: #sig-release channel, sig-release mailing list, kubernetes-dev mailing list, and the Kubernetes Community Meeting.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. When the new Release Team Lead gives the OK, open the form and announce it in the following places: #sig-release channel, sig-release mailing list, kubernetes-dev mailing list, and the Kubernetes Community Meeting.
```

> 4. Generally the form will be open for 7-10 days.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
4. Close the Shadow Application around 7-10 days after the initial announcement.
```

Occasionally, a role may not get enough qualified candidates, in which case it's the EA's job to work with the new Role Lead to find or solicit additional candidates.

### Shadow Status

Weeks: 1 to 12

The apprenticeship program that is shadowing doesn't run itself.  The EA is responsible for a few things to make sure it is effective.

First, have a "shadow orientation" meeting sometime in week 2 or week 3, after all shadows are selected.  This meeting will likely have to be split for time zone reasons and held twice.  In this meeting, go over the information in the main Shadow docs, and then open things for questions or discussion. Make sure that Shadows know they can come to you if they have problems during their apprenticeship.

Then, throughout the release cycle, do what you can to make sure that the shadows are participating in RT activities, particularly meetings.  For example, each Shadow should deliver the Role update during a release meeting or burndown meeting at least once. If a Role Lead is absent from a meeting and no Shadow takes over, that often indicates a problem.

### Succession

Weeks: 9 to 12

> Have meetings, or private chats, with each Role Lead and each Shadow Team to talk about succession.  For the Role Leads, find out who they would nominate to be the new lead and why, and record this information for the incoming Release Lead.  For the Shadows, ask them to think about what they want to do after the release.  This not only includes further RT roles, but other things they could do such as branch management or release engineering.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Have meetings, or private chats, with each Role Lead and each Shadow Team to talk about succession.  For the Role Leads, find out who they would nominate to be the new lead and why, and record this information for the incoming Release Lead.  For the Shadows, ask them to think about what they want to do after the release.  This not only includes further RT roles, but other things they could do such as Release Engineering.
```

> The EA also needs to pick the EA for the next release no later than Week 11 (pending confirmation by the incoming RL), because they need to get started before final release.  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The EA also needs to pick the EA for the next release no later than Week 11 (pending confirmation by the incoming Release Team Lead), because they need to get started before final release.  
```
